Nineteenth chapter, where it is said
how the Spaniards ordered the Mexica to
hold the festivity of Huitzilopochtli. But
when this happened the Captain was not
present, for at that time he went to the
coast because of the arrival of Panfilo de
Narvaez.
And afterward Pedro de Alvarado requested the festivity of Huitzilopochtli,
wanting to see and behold how his festivity
was and what sorts of things were done.
Thereupon Moteuccoma gave the orders;
those of his subordinates who could still
enter where he was brought out the announcement. And when the announcement came out from where Moteuccoma
was detained, then the women who had
fasted for a year ground up the amaranth,
the fish amaranth, in the temple courtyard.
The Spaniards came out well adorned in
battle equipment, outfitted for war, arrayed as warriors. They passed among the
grinding women, circling around them,
looking at each one, looking upon their faces. And when they were through looking at them, they went into the great palace. It later became known, according to
what is said, that they would have killed
people at that time if many of the men had
congregated.
And when the feast day of Toxcatl had
arrived, toward sunset they began to give
human form to Huitzilopochtli's body.
They formed it like a person, they made it
look like a person, they gave it a person's
appearance. And what they made his body
of was just dough of amaranth seed, fish
amaranth seed. They placed it on a platform of sticks, "humrrungbird sticks" and
"ear sticks."
And when it had become like a person,
then they put feather-down on his head
and painted his face, making his face
striped, and they put serpent earplugs on
him, with turquoise glued on them. And
from the serpent earplugs hung rings of
thorns, made of gold, like toes, cut like
toes. And his nose rod was an arrow, made
ofhammered gold, set with stones,
thinned and with stones scattered on it.
Also from it hung what is called the ring of thorns. It was painted
with stripes on the surface, and the manner of its being painted on the surface was
with blue and yellow. On his head they
placed his humrrungbird totem. They followed that with what is named an ane11cyotl, arranged of feathers, cylindrical, a bit
pointed, a bit pointed at the bottom.
Then they placed at the back of his neck
a ball of yellow parrot feathers, from
which hung a boy's lock of neck-hair. And
he had a cloak of nettles, colored black,
feathered in five places with eagle down,
that he gathered about himself Below he
wore a cape covered with skulls and bones,
and above he wrapped himself also in a
sleeveless jacket, painted in tlaq11aq11allo
chewed-up style, for there were painted
all severed heads, ears, hearts, entrails, livers, lungs, hands, and feet. And he had a simple loincloth, but his loincloth was very precious. It too had the tlaq11aq11allo motif
woven into its design. His large loincloth was just of paper, paper from tree
bark, a braza wide and twenty long,
painted with a blue striped design.
And at his hips he carried his blood banner,
just of paper, with a flint knife at the point
of the staff it was painted with red
color, painted like blood. And the flint
knife at the point was likewise made of
paper, painted the same way, painted like
blood. And the shield he had was made of
strong reeds, a reed shield, feathered in
four places with eagle down, sprinkled
with feathers. It is called a tellel1uelli. And
it had a shield banner, painted like the
blood banner. And he held four arrows together with his shield. And from his left
arm hung an arm band, arranged of coyote
fur, and from it hung strips of paper.
And when it had dawned and was already the day of his festivity, very early in
the morning those who had made vows to
him unveiled his face. Forming a single
row before him they offered him incense;
each in his place laid down before him offerings offood for fasting and rolled amaranth dough. And at this time they no longer took him up or raised him to the top of
his temple. And it was as though all the
youthful warriors had gathered together
and had hit on the idea of holding and
observing the festivity in order to show the
Spaniards something, to make them marvel and instruct them.
Everyone ran and scurried in the direction of the temple courtyard for the snake dancing there. And when all had assembled, singing and snake-dancing began.
Those who had fasted for twenty days and
those who had fasted for a year went
about jointly. Their pine rods detained
people; they brandished the pine rods at
anyone who tried to leave. Anyone who
needed to leave to relieve himself put
down his net cape and his forked heron-feather ornament as a signal.
When anyone absolutely would not obey,
would not accept punishment, was insolent, because of that they beat him soundly
on the back, the thighs, the shoulders.
They shoved him outside the precinct,
they threw him out, pushing him so he fell
flat on his face; he went out on his face, on
his ear. No one in their hands made a
sound.
The helpers of Huitzilopochtli, those
who had fasted for a year, inspired great
and general fear, they were respected by
all, they were persons of universal authority. Those who went in the lead [of the
dance], the great leaders, who had done
great things, were able to pass, and they did
not detain them . But as to all the youths,
those with a lock ofhair behind the head
and those with the jar-shaped headdress,
who had taken a captive with the help of
others, the leaders, called youth leaders, who had gone and taken one or
perhaps two captives, they also detained
them, saying to them, "Get along with
you, rascals, you are showing bad things
to people, they are taking an example
from you." 