Twenty first chapter, where it is said
how the war first began, when the Mexica
battled with the Spaniards here in Mexico.
And then the Spaniards fortified themselves. From there the Spaniards shot at the
Mexica with iron bolts and fired guns at
them. And then they placed Moteuccoma
in irons. And then all the warriors who had
died were retrieved, taken to places, and
identified. And wailing arose from the
mothers and fathers, crying and weeping
over them. First they took them to their
various homes, and afterward they brought
them to the temple courtyard and assembled them there. They burned them in a
particular place called Quauhxicalco. But
some were burned only at the various
youths' houses.
And when the sun was setting, while
there was still a little sunlight, then Itzquauhtzin cried out; from a roof terrace he
cried out, saying, O Mexica, o people of
Tenochtitlan and Tlatelolco, your ruler
the Tlacateuctli Moteuccoma addresses
you, saying, Let the Mexica hear: we are
not their match, may they be dissuaded. May the arrows
and shields of war be laid down. The poor
old men and women, the common people,
the infants who toddle and crawl, who lie
in the cradle or on the cradle board and
know nothing yet, are all suffering. This is
why your ruler says, 'we are not their
match; let everyone be dissuaded.' They
have placed him in irons, they have put
irons on his feet."
And when he had finished saying this,
the Mexica railed against him, reproaching
him. They grew angry and began to fall
into a ranting rage. One of them, boiling
over and ranting, said to him, "What does
Moteuccoma say, you rogue? Aren't you
one ofhis men?" Then there was a
clamor, an increasing clamor, and then arrows fell on the roo( But the Spaniards
held their shields over Moteuccoma and
Itzquauhtzin lest the Mexica's arrows
should hit them.
The reason the Mexica were very angry
was that the Spaniards had entirely annihilated the warriors and killed them
treacherously, without warning. They did
not neglect to surround the palace; they
kept watch at various places where someone might enter by stealth, where someone might secretly deliver bread. Everything that had been being given to them
was completely blocked off, absolutely no
one delivered anything any more. It was as
though they were drying out their innards.
And as to those who would try to give
them news and inform them, or gain their
favor by giving them a bit of food, if they
were seen and detected, then they killed
them there, they disposed of them, by
striking them on the nape of the neck or
stoning them.
Once some Mexica were seen delivering arrows fitted with birds' feathers; they
let it out that some were secretly
getting in. Therefore strict orders were
given that good watch should be kept, that
each road and canal should be well
guarded. Great care was taken to keep a
good lookout. And those who had taken
in the arrows were doing their duty, sent
by the stewards of Ayotzintepec and Chinantlan. Then and there they took their
last breaths, their task came to a conclusion. At the canal they struck them on the
napes of their necks with heavy pointed
sticks.
There was internal strife among the Tenochca, and it was without reason that
they seized those who were performing
duties, saying "This is the one," and then
killing him. And if they saw a crystal lip
plug on someone, they hastened to seize
him and killed him, saying, "He too is one
of those who go inside and give provisions
to Moteuccoma." And if they saw some
one who had tied about him a thin tributeworker's cloak, they hurried to seize him
too, saying, "This is another wretched fellow who goes about carrying scandalous
and harmful tales, who takes them in to
Moteuccoma when he goes to see him."
And he who would try to save himself
would implore them, saying, "O Mexica,
what are you doing? I am not one of
them." They told him, "You are one of
them, you rogue, you are not doing duty."
Then and there they killed him. They
were just keeping watch on everyone,
going about being careful about everyone;
they kept their eyes peeled, the Mexica
just watched everyone. They punished
many for invented things, who were
treacherously killed; they punished them
for wrongdoings not their own. And others doing duty work hid themselves, went
to shelter, no longer showed themselves to
anyone or let themselves be seen, no longer came out among people. They were
greatly afraid, limp with fear; they went
about taking refuge so that they would not
fall into someone's hands.
And when they had the Spaniards closed
in their buildings, they fought them for
only seven days. They were shut in for
twenty three days, and during each of
these days the canals were excavated, widened, deepened, and the sides madsteeper. Everywhere the canals were made
more difficult to pass. And on the roads,
various walls were built, walls were laid
here and there. Walls were set up and
the passageways between houses made
difficult.
And when this was done.