Chapter Twentyone, of how the war
between the Mexica and the Spaniards
began in Mexico.
How the war between the Indians
and the Spaniards began: the Spaniards fortified themselves in the royal palace
with Moteuccoma himself and also with
Itzquauhtzin, the governor ofTlatelolco.
The Indians surrounded them and battled
them fiercely. The Spaniards defended
themselves with artillery, crossbows, and
muskets, and did the Indians great damage.
Then they put Moteuccoma in irons, and
also the Indians started burying those
whom the Spaniards had killed in the
square, for whose death a great wail went
up in all the city, because those who had
died were of very high rank. They buried
them in different places according to
their rites that same day at sunset.
Itzquauhtzin, governor of Tlatelolco,
went up on the tlapancos of
the royal palace and began to shout, saying, O Mexica, o Tlatelolca, consider
that the lord Moteuccoma your king implores you to cease fighting and lay
down your weapons, because these men
are very strong, stronger than us. If you do
not stop making war on them, the whole
people will be greatly harmed, because
they have already tied your king with iron.
When the Mexica and Tlatelolca heard
these shouts, they began to rage against
Moteuccoma and curse him among themselves, saying, What does this faggot Moteuccoma say? And you're a wretch along
with him. We will not halt the war. Then
they started giving war cries and shooting
arrows and darts toward where the speaker
was, together with Moteuccoma. But the
Spaniards covered them with shields and
they received no harm. They were greatly enraged against the
Spaniards because they killed the leaders
and brave men treacherously.
Hence they kept the royal palace surrounded, letting no one go in or out or
take in any provisions, so that they would
die of hunger. If anyone secretly gave food
to someone on the inside, when those outside learned ofit they would kill him.
Those on the outside learned that some
Mexica were going in there, secretly taking in arrows. Then they increased their
diligence in keeping watch so that no one
should enter, neither by land nor by
water, and those whom they found guilty
of having taken something in they killed.
Then a great confusion arose among the
Mexica, some accusing others of having
gone in, 119 so they killed many, especially 120 the servants or pages ofMoteuccoma,
who wore crystal lip plugs, which were a
particular livery or sign of those 121 of Moteuccoma's family, as well as those who
wore thin cloaks called ayatl, which were
the livery of Moteuccoma's pages. They
accused them all, saying that they had gone
in to give food to their lord and tell what
was happening outside, and they killed
them all. From then on there was great vigilance that no one should enter. And so
all those of Moteuccoma's house fled and
hid so they would not be killed.
The Mexica assaulted the Spaniards for
seven days and kept them surrounded for
twenty-three, and during this time they
widened and deepened the canals and
blocked the roads with walls, and made
great bulwarks so that the Spaniards would
not be able to get out anywhere.